# 2017 Initial Conditions Review

### Goals From Last Meeting:
1. Initial conditions for 2017 + work with Aurora by end of week.
2. More data exploration...
3. Hood Canal hydrodynamics literature review.
4. Correspondence with Taylor about 10/18 meeting + Tall.
5. Look into ORCA buoy data work stream.

### Completed Goals:
1. Initial conditions for 2017 completed for first test run.
2. Compiling hydrodynamics literature review.
3. Correspondence with Taylor + Tall.

---

## 2017 Initial Conditions for LO Run Review

Since last meeting (and since being unable to attend last week due to travel chaos), I was able to implement a first pass of the 2017 LO initial conditions using observational data. Preliminary review deemed them not totally unreasonable and usable for starting the run; however, I'd still like to review it here! I modified the following variables for initial conditions based on data availability:
1. Temperature
2. Salinity
3. Oxygen
4. NO3 (calculated as NO3 + NO2 measured)
5. NH4
6. chlorophyll
7. TIC (assumed to be DIC measured)
8. alkalinity

In theory, I should have not changed anything outside of the Salish Sea region, and regions where there was no data availability should default to use the original data field (I'm simply overwriting with new VFC-type data filling). There are some areas where bio variables seem to look different, even though there are now bio casts present. I think this is largely due to a dependence on these bio fields on salinity or temperature, which may already be set by different casts in an "apply CTD casts to initial conditions" step. I'll have to look into this further. **Note:** This is using two months of cast on either side of a selected date (January 1, 2017 in this case) and I'm using similar "minimum casts" condition as I do in volume calculations, such as:
1. Saanich Inlet casts can't count for more than 10% of the Strait of Georgia domain.
2. A single cast can't account for more than 60% of a region.

The following animations show the results of the initial conditions for each variable I modified for each layer, with "original" and "new" shown side by side.

<p style="text-align:center;"><video src="https://github.com/dakotamm/dakotamm.github.io/assets/55995675/504c08ea-c0d1-4e53-a569-535bf7e6812b
" controls="controls" style="max-width: 800px;"></video><br>Fig 1. 2017 salt IC method comparison.</p><br>

<p style="text-align:center;"><video src="https://github.com/dakotamm/dakotamm.github.io/assets/55995675/c286b9b6-4d60-459d-8c95-a42600e582e4" controls="controls" style="max-width: 800px;"></video><br>Fig 2. 2017 temperature IC method comparison.</p><br>


<p style="text-align:center;"><video src="https://github.com/dakotamm/dakotamm.github.io/assets/55995675/a53e632a-e782-4423-b5ae-a79a568f7a42
" controls="controls" style="max-width: 800px;"></video><br>Fig 3. 2017 DO IC method comparison.</p><br>

<p style="text-align:center;"><video src="https://github.com/dakotamm/dakotamm.github.io/assets/55995675/d97081b8-efcb-433e-a1d1-9f4b2adcd80e
" controls="controls" style="max-width: 800px;"></video><br>Fig 4. 2017 NO3 IC method comparison.</p><br>

<p style="text-align:center;"><video src="https://github.com/dakotamm/dakotamm.github.io/assets/55995675/94b6f532-b59e-460e-a61d-559a2d0c2bf1" controls="controls" style="max-width: 800px;"></video><br>Fig 5. 2017 NH4 IC method comparison.</p><br>

<p style="text-align:center;"><video
src="https://github.com/dakotamm/dakotamm.github.io/assets/55995675/00f02125-f681-4bd5-83a3-fd95be7a356c" controls="controls" style="max-width: 800px;"></video><br>Fig 6. 2017 chlorophyll IC method comparison.</p><br>

<p style="text-align:center;"><video src="https://github.com/dakotamm/dakotamm.github.io/assets/55995675/a296d247-5f4b-4d77-9dc1-eb2d34e6a0f95" controls="controls" style="max-width: 800px;"></video><br>Fig 7. 2017 TIC IC method comparison.</p><br>

<p style="text-align:center;"><video src="https://github.com/dakotamm/dakotamm.github.io/assets/55995675/49ae5b4b-07ed-4847-9e4e-fdea470f8cf5" controls="controls" style="max-width: 800px;"></video><br>Fig 8. 2017 alkalinity IC method comparison.</p><br>


---

## Hood Canal Hydrodynamics Literature Review Planning



---

## Questions Toward Paper 1

Leaving this on here for posterity:

1. Is there an observable multi-decadal trend in DO throughout the whole Salish Sea?
   * So far, we've seen that there is really sparse data (in current datasets) before the 2000s. With this data, we can't really make out an upward or downward trend in the Salish Sea as whole, or in the Strait of Georgia, Strait of Juan de Fuca, and Puget Sound as a whole.
2. Are there observable multi-decadal trends in DO throughout different regions? How do regions compare and contrast in DO trends?
   * We DO see some variation since 2000; however, the trend is increasing DO peaking at 2012 and then a decrease. Some regions seem to show a slight decline since 1999 (like South Sound) and some regions show a "mountain" pattern (like Hood Canal).
3. Does DO co-vary with temperature, salinity, NO3, etc.? What are the most significant predictors of DO, if there are any?
4. What's the correlation between environmental indicators and events (i.e., the Blob, PDO, ENSO) that correlate with these trends?
5. Are there significant events that warrant further study, like the Blob?
   * 2015 seems less spicy than anticipated so maybe!

---

## Bookkeeping 
* August 21 - September 15, 2023 remote work

---

### Issues/Questions:
1. Common error estimation methods + statistical bias/error - need lit. review.
2. Organize literature - Endnote or Bibtex.
3. CTD/bottle duplicate DO in ecology set - clean this in VFC (output not affected, only number of casts included).
4. Weird "1-cast = np.nan hyp_vol" issue comes up on 4/2017, 5/2019, and 6/2019. May be an averaging problem.
5. Data cleaning (1950 DO concentrations).
6. Averaging casts in same location.
7. Write VFC-specific command-line tags.
8. Weighted averages are not doing a linear interpolation between gridcell depths yet.
9. Averages below threshold depth are only written for obs data so far.
10. Write plotting functions.

### Looking Ahead:
1. Initial conditions for 2017.
2. Finish KC data cleaning.
3. VFC for Aurora's LO output.
4. Readings with Aurora (e.g., Santana & Shull, Sutton et al.).
5. Reach out to Greg Johnson!
6. OSM abstracts???

### Goals For This Week:
1. Initial conditions for 2017 + work with Aurora by end of week.
2. More data exploration...
3. Hood Canal hydrodynamics literature review.
4. Correspondence with Taylor about 10/18 meeting + Tall.
5. Look into ORCA buoy data work stream.
