# Penn Cove Section Animations

I have created an animation from my Whidbey Basin nested model to complement field planning and collection on Thursday, December 4, 2025. The following video has 5 transects in Penn Cove. Each transect is plotting the velocity vectory that crosses the transect most normally. In other words, for the north-south transects, I'm plotting the east-west velocity "u" and vise versa for the east-west transects using "v". Eastward and northward are positive (red) for "u" and "v", respectively.

I have used hourly output for the most similar tides to December 4, 2025: December 3 & 4, 2017. Both days have very similar timing and amplitude of tides. I included both days and some buffer on either end (72 hours in total). Please note the white dot in plan view indicates the left side of the transect.

<p style="text-align:center;"><video src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/da84ff1c-1d3f-48b8-8ffb-a3f8aa898077" controls="controls" style="max-width: 800px;"></video><br>Fig 1. Hourly modeled surface velocities, mooring locations, and five transects of approximately normal velocities in Penn Cove for December 3-4, 2017.</p><br>

There's a lot to dissect here! A few quick thoughts:
* During flood, the dominant outflow is tends to "tunnel" out toward the south side of the Cove.
* During early flood, surface salinity shows an inward "jet" in the middle of the Cove with outflow on either side. (Two moorings may not capture central flow?)
* During flood, there is a somewhat resolved counterclockwise rotation toward the head of Penn Cove. This rotation doesn't seem as apparent on ebb.
* There is a very clear two layer flow on ebb with outflow on top.
* Note for later: how much does tidal pumping play into exchange?
